src/content/blog/what-is-nassp.md, before:

---
title: 'What is NASSP?'
description: 'The most accurate Apollo simulation (as far as we know)'
pubDate: 'Sep 5, 2024'
heroImage: '/img/blog/nassp-refactor/thumb.png'
---

For over two and a half years I've contributed to an open-source addon called "NASSP" for the Orbiter space flight simulator program. This addon simulates the Apollo space program that landed humans on the moon in the 1960s and '70s. That is to say, it adds all the relevant space vehicles, including the Saturn IB, Saturn V, Command and Service Module, Lunar Module, and even the tangentially-related Skylab orbital workshop. Additionally, it includes the necessary logic to compute and fly the historical missions, or even plan one's own custom missions. For the Saturn launch vehicle, the Command and Service Module, and Lunar Module, a vast majority of systems are implemented and functional, acting very similarly to their real-life behavior. This project is intended to be a "study simulation": a simulation that is accurate and realistic enough that it can be used to study and learn about the spacecraft behavior, procedures, and mission profiles in as close to an academic manner as can be done with the information and technology available. We personally consider NASSP to be the single most accurate simulation of the Apollo program that currently exists. It's not perfect, but we strive to make it better every time we work on it. For each vessel, we have whole heaps of code which simulates the inner workings of the various systems and components inside the craft, including but not limited to: environmental control and life support; electrical power generation and distribution; cryogenic, gas, and liquid consumables; thermal control and heating/cooling; propulsion; and guidance, navigation, and computer subsystems. Orbiter, the simulator itself, handles the complex physics and aerodynamics of flight, and provides some help with loading and rendering assets like graphics, but pretty much all other computations and work is done by our code.

Commit message:

More work on NASSP and refactor posts

src/content/blog/what-is-nassp.md, after:

---
title: 'What is NASSP?'
description: 'The most accurate Apollo simulation (as far as we know)'
pubDate: 'Sep 5, 2024'
heroImage: '/img/blog/what-is-nassp/thumb.png'
---

For over two and a half years I've contributed to an open-source addon called "NASSP" for the Orbiter space flight simulator program. This addon simulates the Apollo space program that landed humans on the moon in the 1960s and '70s. That is to say, it adds all the relevant space vehicles, including the Saturn IB, Saturn V, Command and Service Module, Lunar Module, and even the tangentially-related Skylab orbital workshop. Additionally, it includes the necessary logic to compute and fly the historical missions, or even plan one's own custom missions.

For the Saturn launch vehicle, the Command and Service Module, and Lunar Module, a vast majority of systems are implemented and functional, acting very similarly to their real-life behavior. For each vessel, we have whole heaps of code which simulates the inner workings of the various systems and components inside the craft, including but not limited to: environmental control and life support; electrical power generation and distribution; cryogenic, gas, and liquid consumables; thermal control and heating/cooling; propulsion; and guidance, navigation, and computer subsystems. Orbiter, the simulator itself, handles the complex physics and aerodynamics of flight, and provides some help with loading and rendering assets like graphics, but pretty much all other computations and work is done by our code.

This project is intended to be a "study simulation": a simulation that is accurate and realistic enough that it can be used to study and learn about the spacecraft behavior, procedures, and mission profiles in as close to an academic manner as can be done with the information and technology available. We personally consider NASSP to be the single most accurate simulation of the Apollo program that currently exists. It's not perfect, but we strive to make it better every time we work on it. But in its current state, you can generally expect that, for any given historical mission:

- The simulation is date- and time-accurate. That is, the simulated solar system is simulating the conditions at the specified date and time of the real historical events. The Earth, Moon, sun, and other celestial bodies are all in an accurate position. This is courtesy of Orbiter's ability to simulate at an arbitrary MJD.
- Due to the above point, lighting conditions generally match those of the real historical period, meaning that the visual context of maneuvers, optical sightings, etc. will line up with how things looked to the astronauts. This also means it is also possible to somewhat faithfully recreate photos taken during the missions. It should be noted, however, that Orbiter's graphics capabilities are rather limited, anything close to true photorealism is not possible.
- The guidance and navigation systems of the two spacecraft are fully simulated, including a full emulation of the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) and Abort Guidance System (AGS), as well as a partial simulation of the Saturn Instrument Unit on the launch vehicle. We have a nearly complete set of AGC software versions that were flown during the Apollo program, and with only two exceptions, nearly every mission flies the actual AGC code it was running in reality. We have only successfully archived two versions of the AGS software, but recovery of other versions is difficult and unlikely. Missions have been adapted to use whichever software version is closest to what they would have used in reality.
- Furthermore, the techniques, logic equations, and mathematical computations used by mission controllers in Houston and their Real-Time Computer Complex (RTCC) have been reimplemented for use by either manual user control, or by an automatic mission control simulation (currently available for the Apollo 7 through Apollo 12 historical missions). In the manual case, the user can perform a wide variety of calculations to verify or correct trajectories, adjust their orbit, plan mission-related maneuvers such as lunar orbit insertion, landing, and rendezvous, as well as monitor various mission and spacecraft parameters. In the automated case, the MCC automatically provides data via computer uplink and text-based Pre-Advisory Data (PAD) for all important mission milestones including engine burns, rendezvous, guidance and navigation updates, and more.
- Due to the above two points, generally speaking any tasks of guidance and navigation can be performed using the same procedures and achieve typically very similar results for trajectory corrections, rendezvous, and other calculations.
